The men fled; the women stayed.

That’s the story of Easter weekend in the New Testament. Most of Jesus’ male disciples vanished when the trouble started, leaving his mother and Mary Magdalene and other women to watch by the cross, prepare his body for his burial, and then (with the men still basically in hiding) find the empty tomb.

Male absence and female energy has also been the story, albeit less starkly and dramatically, of Christian practice in many times and places since. Today, most Christian churches and denominations in America — conservative as well as liberal, male-led and female-led both — have some sort of gender gap, sometimes modest but often stark. Despite their varying theologies, evangelicalism, mainline Protestantism, Mormonism and Catholicism all have about a 55-45 female-male split in religious identification; for black churches, it’s 60-40.

Meanwhile, the belief-in-God and frequency-of-prayer gaps are even larger, with American men twice as likely as women to call themselves atheists — something that will surprise exactly nobody who has sojourned among Richard Dawkins fans.
There are interesting arguments about the roots of this division: Whether women are somehow naturally more religious than men, whether Jesus’ dim view of violence is particularly off-putting to the male of the species, or whether some specific cultural shift — a feminine turn in medieval piety, the separation of the sexes in the Industrial Revolution, the late-modern turn away from martial religious language — created the modern Christian situation.

The fact that the gender gap is less apparent or reversed in the Islamic world and Israel is a suggestive indicator that something specific to Christianity is at work. But that raises an interesting question for our own society: What happens to this pattern if historic Christianity decays or transforms into something else? Does a religious gender gap diminish, or does it widen? Does our emerging post-Christian or quasi-Christian model of religiosity — the therapeutic style of Oprah, the individualized mix of prayer and meditation and self-help — potentially reconcile the sexes, or push them further apart?
These Easter thoughts are occasioned, in part, by reading some of the countless think-pieces about the rise of Jordan Peterson, the Canadian psychology professor turned moral-philosophical guru for a large and grateful cohort of young men.